Write paper to submit to JOSE (#138)
UMCarpentries/intro-curriculum-r: paper/paper.md

---
title: 'Developing and deploying an integrated workshop curriculum teaching computational skills for reproducible research'
tags:
  - reproducible research
  - data science
  - R
  - git
  - Unix shell
authors:
  - name: Zena Lapp^[co-first author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-4674-2176
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool^[co-first author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1  
  - name: Nick Lesniak
    orcid:
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Dana King
    orcid:
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Catherine Barnier
    orcid:
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Matthew Flickinger
    orcid:
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Jule Krüger
    orcid:
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Courtney Armour
    orcid:
    affiliation: 2

>   - name: Maya Lapp
>     orcid:
>     affiliation: 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: Maya M. Lapp
    orcid: 0000-0002-8249-1186 
    affiliation: 3
```

  - name: Jason Tallant
    orcid:
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Rucheng Diao
    orcid: 0000-0002-2932-6755
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Shelly Johnson
    orcid:
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Morgan Oneka
    orcid:
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Sarah Tomkovich
    orcid:
    affiliation: 2

>   - name: Jacqueline Moltzau

Reviewer 2: Jacqueline Moltzau Anderson
orcid: 0000-0003-1398-5980

    orcid:
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Sarah K. Lucas
    orcid:
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Patrick D. Schloss^[corresponding author]
    orcid: 0000-0002-6935-4275
    affiliation: 2

> affiliations:
>   - name: Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan
>     index: 1
>   - name: Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan
>     index: 2
>   - name: TODO
>     index: 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
affiliations:
  - name: Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan
    index: 1
  - name: Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan
    index: 2
  - name: TODO
    index: 3
  - name: independent educator
    index: 4
```

1. Group practice exercises
1. Where to go from here

Each lesson builds on the previous lessons.
The Unix shell, git, and GitHub are introduced using the files generated in the
R for plotting lesson.
The lesson content for subsequent modules is then intermittently committed and
pushed to GitHub.
The written report combines all of the skills learned previously to write a
report that one could share with the United Nations.
Then, the learners have a chance to put everything they have learned into
practice by working in small groups on practice problems that cover the course
content.
Finally, we end with a short module recapping what the workshop covered and how
learners can continue to get help and learn more after the workshop ends.

## Instructional Design
<!-- teaching philosophy / pedagogy -->

Our modules and instructor suggestions are developed in the style of [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/):

1. Each module contains learning objectives at the beginning of each lesson and
a summary of key points.
1. The five core modules (2 to 6) are designed to be taught via live coding of
the content to learners.

> This is a central feature of Carpentries lessons, and we believe it is a great

Reviewer 2: The Carpentries

Author: I think this one is actually okay per their style guide: https://carpentries.org/about/#referencing-the-carpentries

---
title: 'Developing and deploying an integrated workshop curriculum teaching computational skills for reproducible research'
tags:
  - reproducible research
  - data science
  - R
  - git
  - Unix shell
authors:
  - name: Zena Lapp^[co-first author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-4674-2176
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool^[co-first author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1  
  - name: Nick Lesniak
    orcid:
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Dana King
    orcid:
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Catherine Barnier
    orcid:
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Matthew Flickinger

>     orcid:

Reviewer 3: My orcid is: 0000-0002-8528-8925

Author: @MrFlick what should we list as your affiliation?

Reviewer 3: Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan

the workshop, and lowers the barrier to entry for new instructors as they do not
have to develop their own curriculum or sift through extensive content.
We developed this curriculum during a two-day sprint,
successfully used the curriculum to host a two-day virtual workshop,
and updated the material based on instructor and learner feedback.
We hope that this curriculum will be useful to other instructors interested in
teaching workshops with similar learning objectives.

# Statement of Need

The University of Michigan instance of The Carpentries has taught workshops
using the curriculum created by The Carpentries organization since 2015.
In that time, our instructors have found several advantages and disadvantages to
using the Software Carpentry curriculum in particular.
Some advantages are that any programming language lesson (e.g. R or
Python) can be paired with lessons on the Unix shell and version control,
the lessons have been refined over years by many contributors and taught at
workshops around the world, and
the instructional design demonstrates good pedagogy for teaching beginner data
science practitioners.

> However, we found that the curriculum did not meet all of our needs.

Reviewer 3: It seems odd to me to jump right to "the [existing Carpentries] curriculum did not meet all of our needs" without first listing those exact needs. This seems to defining the needs negatively rather than positively asserting them. Is the next paragraph meant to be the positive statement of what exactly the needs were? I don't think the existing carpentries curriculum has no use, it's just perhaps that we had different goals than they may have had when preparing the materials and just making that point clear.

First, the modular nature of the curriculum means that each lesson is independent
from the others, so it is not apparent to learners how to integrate all of the
skills together for reproducible research projects.
Additionally, The Carpentries material is more of a reference than a lesson plan as
there is too much content for the time allotted in a two-day workshop.
Therefore, workshops contain inconsistent content depending on who teaches, and new
instructors face an overwhelming amount of work to prepare for their first
workshop.
Finally, some lessons include niche content that we do not feel is necessary to teach
beginners as we do not use it ourselves in our research projects.

We sought to create a new curriculum that would
teach computational skills in an integrated manner to demonstrate the
reproducible research workflows we use in our own work,
utilize the same inclusive pedagogy refined by The Carpentries,
and contain an appropriate amount of content to deliver consistent workshops
and reduce the burden for new instructors to get involved.

# Collaborative Curriculum Development

We drew on the expertise of The Carpentries community at the

> University of Michigan to develop a custom curriculum that would meet the needs

Reviewer 3: Do we have data about what their actual needs are, or are these based on our perceived ideas of what their needs *should* be? Perhaps there was feedback from previous events that could support this claim.

University of Michigan to develop a custom curriculum that would meet the needs

> of our learners (Figure 1).

Reviewer 4: Should Figure 1 come after this paragraph instead of at the end of this section?

Author: Yeah that makes sense.

instructors can gauge learner understanding of the material.

We also incorporate a few additional key components into the curriculum:

1. Each lesson builds off of others, with the goal of creating a final report
that can be shared with others.
1. We structured the curriculum such that it could be taught through an
in-person or virtual workshop.
1. We require learners to install all software before the workshop (as The
Carpentries also requires), and ask them to run an example script that tests
whether everything is installed correctly.
Learners must send screenshots of the script output to the workshop lead in
advance in order to attend. This insures that any installation issues can be
addressed before the workshop begins.
1. An extensive small group practice module towards the end of the workshop
allows learners to more independently practice the skills they have learned
throughout.
1. The workshop concludes with a recap of what was covered and resources
available for learners to continue learning and getting help as their skills
develop.

## Pilot Workshop
<!-- experience of use -->

We piloted our curriculum during a virtual two-day Software Carpentry workshop.

> In line with The Carpentries style, we had four instructors and six helpers at

Reviewer 3: Perhaps "recommendation" is better than "style" here.

the workshop to assist with learner questions and technical issues.
We also used the "sticky note" system where learners can indicate their progress

> on exercises and requests for help by using different colored sticky notes.

Reviewer 3: So exactly how many different sticky note colors did you use and what did they mean? How did those map to specific zoom reactions? It might be helpful to provide a bit more guidance here. Or is there a reference where the "sticky note" system is described in detail?

---
title: 'Developing and deploying an integrated workshop curriculum teaching computational skills for reproducible research'
tags:
  - reproducible research
  - data science
  - R
  - git
  - Unix shell
authors:
  - name: Zena Lapp^[co-first author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-4674-2176
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool^[co-first author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1  
  - name: Nick Lesniak

>     orcid:

Reviewer 5: Add NL Orcid ID 0000-0001-9359-5194
```suggestion
    orcid: 0000-0001-9359-5194
```

integrate the skills together in their own work.
The new curriculum we developed (https://umcarpentries.org/intro-curriculum-r/)
aims to teach novices how to implement reproducible research practices to
perform data analysis.
It emphasizes the iterative nature of coding and data analysis through
integrated live coding lessons and practice exercises.
Furthermore, this curriculum provides a succinct resource for learners to reference both during and after
the workshop, and lowers the barrier to entry for new instructors as they do not
have to develop their own curriculum or sift through extensive content.
We developed this curriculum during a two-day sprint,
successfully used the curriculum to host a two-day virtual workshop,
and updated the material based on instructor and learner feedback.
We hope that this curriculum will be useful to other instructors interested in
teaching workshops with similar learning objectives.

# Statement of Need

The University of Michigan instance of The Carpentries has taught workshops
using the curriculum created by The Carpentries organization since 2015.
In that time, our instructors have found several advantages and disadvantages to

> using the Software Carpentry curriculum in particular.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
using the Software Carpentry curriculum.
```

throughout each lesson so that learners can practice what they have learned and
instructors can gauge learner understanding of the material.

We also incorporate a few additional key components into the curriculum:

1. Each lesson builds off of others, with the goal of creating a final report
that can be shared with others.
1. We structured the curriculum such that it could be taught through an
in-person or virtual workshop. Virtual workshops are sometimes necessary, as during the COVID-19 pandemic, but are also useful to allow people from a variety of geographic locations to instruct and attend. 
1. We require learners to install all software before the workshop (as The
Carpentries also requires), and ask them to run an example script that tests
whether everything is installed correctly.
Learners must send screenshots of the script output to the workshop lead in
advance in order to attend. This ensures that any installation issues can be
addressed before the workshop begins.
1. An extensive small group practice module towards the end of the workshop
allows learners to more independently practice the skills they have learned

> throughout.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.
```

> throughout.

Reviewer 4: Delete 'throughout'. Might have to remove an extra space

learners can continue to get help and learn more after the workshop ends.

## Instructional Design
<!-- teaching philosophy / pedagogy -->

Our modules and instructor suggestions are developed in the style of [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/):

1. Each module contains learning objectives at the beginning of each lesson and
a summary of key points.
1. The five core modules (2 to 6) are designed to be taught via live coding of
the content to learners.
This is a central feature of Carpentries lessons, and we believe it is a great
way to learn how to program because it requires learners to follow along and
encounter errors that they must debug along the way, fostering additional
questions about the course content.
1. We incorporate formative assessments in the form of short practice exercises
throughout each lesson so that learners can practice what they have learned and
instructors can gauge learner understanding of the material.

We also incorporate a few additional key components into the curriculum:

1. Each lesson builds off of others, with the goal of creating a final report
that can be shared with others.

> 1. We structured the curriculum such that it could be taught through an

Reviewer 6: Maybe worth adding a sentence to specify benefit of virtual workshops? e.g. virtual workshops was necessary during pandemic but are also useful to allow people from a variety of geographic locations to attend

the workshop to assist with learner questions and technical issues.
We also used the "sticky note" system for formative assessment, where learners
indicate their progress on exercises and request for help by using different
colored sticky notes [@becker_responding_2016; @the_carpentries_live_2018].
As the workshop was virtual, we used Zoom reaction icons as virtual sticky
notes, with the red X reaction to ask for help and the green checkmark to
indicate that they successfully completed the exercise at hand.
We had thirty-nine learners of various skill levels from several different
countries, all of whom provided very positive reviews of the workshop.

<!-- TODO: follow-up with SWC on whether we can use our surveys -->

### Virtual Workshop Reflection

We credit the success of our first virtual workshop in large part due to the
curriculum structure and content, as well as the instructors and helpers
involved.
However, we also believe that the following helped make the workshop as
smooth as possible:

1. We suggested that learners have Zoom and RStudio (or the Unix shell) open side-by-side on their computer to minimize toggling between different panels.

> 1. We used Slack for communication among instructors and helpers, as well as between helpers and learners.

Reviewer 6: I think it's worth expanding on the use of slack over zoom chat. soooo many benefits to slack that it justifies having another program open

---
title: 'Developing and deploying an integrated workshop curriculum teaching computational skills for reproducible research'
tags:
  - reproducible research
  - data science
  - R
  - git
  - Unix shell
authors:
  - name: Zena Lapp^[co-first author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-4674-2176
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool^[co-first author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1  
  - name: Nick Lesniak
    orcid: 0000-0001-9359-5194
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Dana King
    orcid: 0000-0003-4635-5272
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Catherine Barnier
    orcid: 0000-0001-7074-401
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Matthew Flickinger
    orcid: 0000-0002-8528-8925
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Jule Krüger
    orcid: 0000-0002-2814-137X
    affiliation: 5
  - name: Courtney R. Armour
    orcid: 0000-0002-5250-1224
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Maya M. Lapp
    orcid: 0000-0002-8249-1186 
    affiliation: 6
  - name: Jason Tallant
    orcid:
    affiliation: 7
  - name: Rucheng Diao
    orcid: 0000-0002-2932-6755
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Morgan Oneka

>     orcid:

Reviewer 7: My orcid is: 0000-0002-9672-0445

resolve an issue,
then creates a pull request and asks for review from another team member,
who finally merges the changes into the default branch.
GitHub pages automatically uses the default branch to build a website which
hosts the polished curriculum (https://umcarpentries.org/intro-curriculum-r/).
This model ensures that at least two pairs of eyes view the changes before they
can be included in the curriculum, which reduces mistakes and contributes to
better quality content.

![The curriculum development framework. Created with BioRender.com.](development-framework.png)

Following the sprint, contributors finalized edits and continued to review each
others' pull requests to complete the alpha version of our curriculum.
Next, we hosted a workshop for instructors to pilot the curriculum.
We collected feedback from the learners and instructors at the end of the pilot
workshop, then held a smaller half-day sprint to revise the curriculum based on
the feedback.
Community members continue to create issues, make edits, and review pull
requests for ongoing refinement of the curriculum.
We have plans to teach more workshops with instructors who did not develop the

> curriculum to gather even more feedback.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
 to gather their unique feedback.
```

# Curriculum

Our curriculum is tailored to people with no prior coding experience who want to

> learn how to use programming to perform data analysis (Figure 2).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
learn how to use R programming for data analysis, visualization and the reporting of results (Figure 2).
```

> We aim to teach our learners not only the basics of performing data analysis,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Not only do we aim to teach our learners the basics of performing empirical data analysis.
```

> but also to provide them with a framework to perform rigorous reproducible

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We also seek to provide a rigorous framework for adhering to reproducible
```

> research that can easily be shared with others.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
research principles that enable researchers to easily share their empirical work with others.
```

![Curriculum overview. Created with BioRender.com.](curriculum-overview.png)

## Learning Objectives

The key learning objectives for our curriculum are:

1. Create clear and informative data visualizations in R, starting with messy data.
1. Perform version control using the Unix shell and git.

> 1. Create reproducible reports using R markdown.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. Create reproducible reports using R Markdown.
```

1. Share code with others on GitHub.

> We believe these skills provide a solid foundation from which learners can teach

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We believe these skills provide learners with a solid foundation from which they can teach
```

> themselves any additional coding skills that they will need in the future.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
themselves any additional coding skills for future use.
```

## Course Content

> Our curriculum consists of modules that cover setup, data analysis and

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Our curriculum consists of nine modules that cover software setup, data analysis and
```

> visualization, version control, sharing code, and writing reports.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
visualization, version control, sharing code, and writing reports which we outline in more detail  below.
```

> We also provide a goal for the workshop: to create a fictitious report for the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We also set an overall goal for the workshop to make the content substantively interesting 
as well as relatable to a wide audience regardless of their original academic discipline or professional practice. Specifically, we task our learners with producing a fictitious report to the
```

> United Nations on the relationship between gross domestic product (GDP), life

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
United Nations that examines the relationship between gross domestic product (GDP), life
```

expectancy, and CO~2~ emissions.
The R programming lessons take a "tidyverse first" approach

> [@robinson_teach_2017] so learners can meet this goal.

Reviewer 8: I am not sure i understand how the tidyverse first approach helps learners achieve this goal. What is unique about this approach that enables this? Perhaps it would be good to explain this at least in a half sentence instead of just citing the paper that outlines the approach?

Author: cc @zenalapp @sklucas, anyone want to take a stab at this?

Author: (if not, I'll probably be able to get to it next week)

Reviewer 4: @sklucas if you could that'd be great!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[@robinson_teach_2017] to quickly teach learners powerful tools for plotting and data analysis.
```

@kelly-sovacool @sklucas here's one possibility. not sure 'quickly' is quite the right word, but can't think of anything better right now

Reviewer 4: Pat's suggestions: Effectively or efficiently

```suggestion
[@robinson_teach_2017] to effectively and efficiently teach learners powerful tools for plotting and data analysis.
```

> The modules are:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The nine curriculum modules are:
```

0. Setup
1. Welcome
1. R for plotting (uses the tidyverse R packages)
1. The Unix shell
1. Git and GitHub
1. R for data analysis (uses the tidyverse R packages)

> 1. Writing reports in R markdown (uses the rmarkdown R package [@xie_r_2018])

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. Writing reports in R Markdown (uses the rmarkdown R package [@xie_r_2018])
```

1. Group practice exercises
1. Where to go from here

> Each lesson builds on the previous lessons.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Each lesson builds on the previous ones.
```

The Unix shell, git, and GitHub are introduced using the files generated in the
R for plotting lesson.
The lesson content for subsequent modules is then intermittently committed and
pushed to GitHub.

> The written report combines all of the skills learned previously to write a

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The `Writing reports in R Markdown' lesson combines all of the skills learned previously to produce a
```

> report that one could share with the United Nations.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
report (as a pdf, Word, or html document) that one could share with the United Nations.
```

> Then, the learners have a chance to put everything they have learned into

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Next, learners get a chance to put everything they have learned into
```

> practice by working in small groups on practice problems that cover the course

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
practice by forming small groups and working on practice problems that cover the entire course
```

content.

> Finally, we end with a short module recapping what the workshop covered and how

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The workshop completes with a short module recapping everything that the curriculum covered as well as offering suggestions on how
```

> learners can continue to get help and learn more after the workshop ends.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
learners can continue to get help and keep learning once the workshop ends.
```

> ## Instructional Design

Reviewer 8: I understand why this section is here. It is a bit repetitive in terms of what was already said above

<!-- teaching philosophy / pedagogy -->

Our modules and instructor suggestions are developed in the style of [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/):

1. Each module contains learning objectives at the beginning of each lesson and
a summary of key points.
1. The five core modules (2 to 6) are designed to be taught via live coding of
the content to learners.
This is a central feature of Carpentries lessons, and we believe it is a great

> way to learn how to program because it requires learners to follow along and

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
way to learn how to program. It requires learners to follow along and
```

encounter errors that they must debug along the way, fostering additional

> questions about the course content.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
questions about the course content. It also leads to instructors making mistakes 
and then demonstrating how to deal with them in an ad hoc and iterative manner.
```

1. We incorporate formative assessments in the form of short practice exercises

> throughout each lesson so that learners can practice what they have learned and

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
throughout each lesson such that learners can practice what they have learned, while 
```

advance in order to attend. This ensures that any installation issues can be
addressed before the workshop begins.
1. An extensive small group practice module towards the end of the workshop
allows learners to more independently practice the skills they have learned.
1. The workshop concludes with a recap of what was covered and resources
available for learners to continue learning and getting help as their skills
develop.

## Pilot Workshop
<!-- experience of use -->

We piloted our curriculum during a virtual two-day Software Carpentry workshop.
In line with The Carpentries recommendations
[@the_carpentries_carpentries_2018], we had four instructors and six helpers at
the workshop to assist with learner questions and technical issues.
We also used the "sticky note" system for formative assessment, where learners
indicate their progress on exercises and request for help by using different
colored sticky notes [@becker_responding_2016; @the_carpentries_live_2018].
As the workshop was virtual, we used Zoom reaction icons as virtual sticky
notes, with the red X reaction to ask for help and the green checkmark to

> indicate that they successfully completed the exercise at hand.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
indicate that an exercise was successfully completed.
```

We had thirty-nine learners of various skill levels from several different
countries, all of whom provided very positive reviews of the workshop.

> By the end of the workshop learners on average felt more confident writing programs, using programming to work with data, overcoming problems while programming, and searching for answers to technical questions online (n = 14 survey respondents; pre- and post-workshop surveys).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
By the end of the workshop, learners on average felt more confident writing programs, using programming to work with data, overcoming problems while programming, and searching for answers to technical questions online (n = 14 survey respondents; pre- and post-workshop surveys).
```

> All attendees who filled out the post-workshop survey (n = 19) would also recommend the workshop to others.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
All attendees who filled out the post-workshop survey (n = 19) would  recommend the workshop to others.
```

### Virtual Workshop Reflection

We credit the success of our first virtual workshop in large part due to the
curriculum structure and content, as well as the instructors and helpers
involved.
However, we also believe that the following helped make the workshop as
smooth as possible:

1. We suggested that learners have Zoom and RStudio (or the Unix shell) open side-by-side on their computer to minimize toggling between different panels.
1. We used Slack for communication among instructors and helpers, as well as between helpers and learners.
Learners asked questions in a group Slack channel where helpers could respond.

> This allowed us to answer the vast majority of learner questions and bugs quickly, clearly, and efficiently without disrupting the lesson or moving the learner to a breakout room.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This allowed us to answer the vast majority of learner questions and bugs quickly, clearly, and efficiently without disrupting the lesson or moving the learner to a Zoom breakout room.
```

> Furthermore, Slack worked much better than the Zoom chat as questions can be answered in threads, are visible to all learners regardless of whether they are connected to Zoom at the time, and  don't get lost as easily.  

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Furthermore, Slack worked much better than the Zoom chat as questions could be answered in threads, were preserved and visible to all learners regardless of whether they were connected to Zoom at the time, and therefore  didn't get lost as easily.  
```

> 1. When a learner needed more help than was possible on Slack, a helper and the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. Whenever a learner needed more help than was possible on Slack, a helper and the
```

> learner entered a breakout room together to troubleshoot.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
learner entered a Zoom breakout room together to troubleshoot.
```

> However, we tried to minimize this option as then the learner misses content

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
However, we tried to minimize this option as much as possible to prevent the learner from missing content
```

covered in the main room.

# Acknowledgements

We thank The Carpentries organization for providing instructor training,
workshop protocols, and the open-source Software Carpentry curriculum, upon
which this curriculum is based. We also thank them for allowing us to use the
pre- and post-workshop survey results in this manuscript.
The Carpentries is a fiscally sponsored project of Community Initiatives, a registered 501(c)3 non-profit organisation based in California, USA.

We thank Victoria Alden and Scott Martin for assisting us in organizing and
advertising our pilot workshop.
We also thank Shelly Johnson for volunteering as a helper at the workshop.

We thank the learners who participated in the workshop, provided feedback, and completed the surveys.

# Funding

Salary support for PDS came from NIH grant R01CA215574.
KLS received support from the NIH Training Program in Bioinformatics (T32
GM070449).
ZL received support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE 1256260.

> Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this
```

Author: this might be official language that @zenalapp has to use

Reviewer 4: Yeah I'm just going to leave it because that's what they tell us to say.

  - name: Morgan Oneka
    orcid: 0000-0002-9672-0445
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Sarah Tomkovich
    orcid: 0000-0003-1638-5307
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Jacqueline Moltzau Anderson
    orcid: 0000-0003-1398-5980
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Sarah K. Lucas
    orcid: 0000-0003-1676-5801
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Patrick D. Schloss^[corresponding author]
    orcid: 0000-0002-6935-4275
    affiliation: 2
affiliations:
  - name: Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan
    index: 1
  - name: Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan
    index: 2
  - name: BRCF Bioinformatics Core, University of Michigan
    index: 3
  - name: Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan
    index: 4
  - name: Center for Political Studies, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan
    index: 5
  - name: Independent educator
    index: 6
  - name: Biological Station, University of Michigan
    index: 7
date: 27 Apr. 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Inspired by well-established material and pedagogy provided by The Carpentries
[@wilson_software_2016], we developed a two-day workshop curriculum that teaches

> introductory R programming for managing, analyzing, plotting and reporting data using the R tidyverse

Reviewer 4: Is it weird to say "introductory R programming....using the R tidyverse"? Maybe we should instead say:

```suggestion
introductory programming for managing, analyzing, plotting and reporting data using the R tidyverse
```

or

```suggestion
introductory R programming for managing, analyzing, plotting and reporting data using the tidyverse
```

Don't have a super strong opinion about this, but it sounds just a bit clunky to me right now.

Reviewer 4: Pat's suggestion:

```suggestion
introductory R programming for managing, analyzing, plotting and reporting data using packages from the tidyverse
```

[@wickham_welcome_2019], the Unix shell, version control with git, and GitHub.

> While the official Software Carpentry curriculum is well-thought-out and comprehensive, we found

Reviewer 4: Not sure I like "well-thought-out". Maybe delete?

```suggestion
While the official Software Carpentry curriculum is comprehensive, we found
```

![Curriculum overview. Created with BioRender.com.](curriculum-overview.png)

## Learning Objectives

The key learning objectives for our curriculum are:

1. Create clear and informative data visualizations in R, starting with messy data.
1. Perform version control using the Unix shell and git.
1. Create reproducible reports using R Markdown.
1. Share code with others on GitHub.

We believe these skills provide learners with a solid foundation from which they can teach
themselves any additional coding skills for future use.

## Course Content

Our curriculum consists of nine modules that cover software setup, data analysis and
visualization, version control, sharing code, and writing reports which we outline in more detail  below.
We also set an overall goal for the workshop to make the content substantively interesting
as well as relatable to a wide audience regardless of their original academic discipline or professional practice. Specifically, we task our learners with producing a fictitious report to the
United Nations that examines the relationship between gross domestic product (GDP), life
expectancy, and CO~2~ emissions.

> The R programming lessons take a "tidyverse first" approach

Reviewer 4: This sentence doesn't really seem to fit in here.

[@robinson_teach_2017] so learners can meet this goal.
The nine curriculum modules are:

0. Setup
1. Welcome

> 1. R for plotting (uses the tidyverse R packages)

Reviewer 4: Is there a reason we don't reference the tidyverse paper here?

1. The Unix shell
1. Git and GitHub
1. R for data analysis (uses the tidyverse R packages)
1. Writing reports in R Markdown (uses the rmarkdown R package [@xie_r_2018])
1. Group practice exercises
1. Where to go from here

Each lesson builds on the previous ones.
The Unix shell, git, and GitHub are introduced using the files generated in the
R for plotting lesson.
The lesson content for subsequent modules is then intermittently committed and
pushed to GitHub.
The `Writing reports in R Markdown' lesson combines all of the skills learned previously to produce a

> report (as a pdf, Word, or html document) that one could share with the United Nations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
report that one could share with the United Nations.
```

1. We require learners to install all software before the workshop (as The
Carpentries also requires), and ask them to run an example script that tests
whether everything is installed correctly.
Learners must send screenshots of the script output to the workshop lead in
advance in order to attend. This ensures that any installation issues can be
addressed before the workshop begins.
1. An extensive small group practice module towards the end of the workshop
allows learners to more independently practice the skills they have learned.
1. The workshop concludes with a recap of what was covered and resources
available for learners to continue learning and getting help as their skills
develop.

## Pilot Workshop
<!-- experience of use -->

We piloted our curriculum during a virtual two-day Software Carpentry workshop.
In line with The Carpentries recommendations
[@the_carpentries_carpentries_2018], we had four instructors and six helpers at
the workshop to assist with learner questions and technical issues.

> We also used the "sticky note" system for formative assessment, where learners

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should move this up to the section where we list what we use from The Carpentries?

indicate their progress on exercises and request for help by using different
colored sticky notes [@becker_responding_2016; @the_carpentries_live_2018].
As the workshop was virtual, we used Zoom reaction icons as virtual sticky
notes, with the red X reaction to ask for help and the green checkmark to
indicate that an exercise was successfully completed.
We had thirty-nine learners of various skill levels from several different
countries, all of whom provided very positive reviews of the workshop.
By the end of the workshop, learners on average felt more confident writing programs, using programming to work with data, overcoming problems while programming, and searching for answers to technical questions online (n = 14 survey respondents; pre- and post-workshop surveys).
All attendees who filled out the post-workshop survey (n = 19) would  recommend the workshop to others.

### Virtual Workshop Reflection

We credit the success of our first virtual workshop in large part due to the
curriculum structure and content, as well as the instructors and helpers
involved.
However, we also believe that the following helped make the workshop as
smooth as possible:

> 1. We suggested that learners have Zoom and RStudio (or the Unix shell) open side-by-side on their computer to minimize toggling between different panels.

Reviewer 4: Should we reference that Carpentries blog post here?

Author: yes, will do!

The nine curriculum modules are:

0. Setup
1. Welcome
1. R for plotting (uses the tidyverse R packages)
1. The Unix shell
1. Git and GitHub
1. R for data analysis (uses the tidyverse R packages)
1. Writing reports in R Markdown (uses the rmarkdown R package [@xie_r_2018])
1. Group practice exercises
1. Where to go from here

Each lesson builds on the previous ones.
The Unix shell, git, and GitHub are introduced using the files generated in the
R for plotting lesson.
The lesson content for subsequent modules is then intermittently committed and
pushed to GitHub.
The `Writing reports in R Markdown' lesson combines all of the skills learned previously to produce a
report (as a pdf, Word, or html document) that one could share with the United Nations.
Next, learners put everything they have learned into
practice by forming small groups and working on practice problems that cover the entire course
content.
The workshop completes with a short module recapping everything that the curriculum covered as well as offering suggestions on how
learners can continue to get help and keep learning once the workshop ends.

> ## Instructional Design

Reviewer 4: Right now the lists include both curriculum content and info about how we run the workshop. Think that's okay, or should we separate them out more?

Author: I think it would be less succinct if we separated them
